MikeO first pass continued (#29)
hannestschofenig/tls-dual-certs: draft-yusef-tls-pqt-dual-certs.md

This document defines a new extension `dual_signature_algorithms` to negotiate support for two categories of signature algorithms, typically one set of classic schemes and one set of PQ schemes. It also makes changes to the `Certificate` and `CertificateVerify` messages to take advantage of both certificates when authenticating the end entity.

## Open Design Issues

This section documents open design questions that are not resolved in this version, and for which the authors wish Working Group input.

This section is for Working Group review, and to be removed before publication.

## Allow mixed certificate chains?

> Issue: TLS 1.3 has `signature_algorithms` to negotiate the signature used in the TLS handshake (which is the public key of the EE cert), and optionally `signature_algorithms_cert` if the peer wishes to negotiate the CA's algorithms separately. Historically, cert chains are either exclusively RSA or exclusively ECDSA and `signature_algorithms_certs` is badly supported in the wild.

Reviewer: Also it's not correct that "`signature_algorithms_certs` is badly supported in the wild". It is very rarely used, but must be supported by all TLS 1.3 compliant stacks.

The question is whether to continue to support negotiation of CA algs separately from EE algs in a dual context.

Design options:

1. When a `signature_algorithms_certs` extension is present, then it applies to both chains of the dual, and `dual_signature_algorithms` only applies to EE certs. If not present, then `dual_signature_algorithms` applies to both EE and chain. This is the option chosen for presentation in this version of the draft, and is believed to be most consistent with the intent of 8446, though it is has bad alignment with TLS implementations in the wild and increases implementation complexity.

> 2. Mandate that `dual_signature_algorithms` always applies to both EE and chain, and take the position that `signature_algorithms_cert` only applies to the single-certificate case. This makes it impossible to have dual certs with mixed-algorithm chains.

Author: I adjusted this wording. That is a much better proposal anyway :smile:

## Common Chains

In order to lessen operational burden on Certification Authority (CA) operators, the two certificates of the dual MAY be issued from the same CA. For example, during the PQC migration, a CA operator might wish to stand up a root CA using a Level 5 PQC algorithm or a hash-based signature, and then continue to issue RSA and ECDSA certificates off that root.

Negotiation of such a setup requires use of the `signature_algorithms_cert` TLS 1.3 extension, which is unmodified from [TLS] and when present it applies equally to both chains of the dual.

In order to optimize bandwidth and avoid sending duplicate copies of the same chain, when constructing a `Certificate` message as described in {{certificate}}, the second certificate chain MAY consist of only an end-entity certificate.

> 

Reviewer: Unfortunately I still strongly disagree with this :-(

A single `signature_algorithms_cert` will provide a single list of root and intermediate algorithms for single, and both parts of dual chain. That is, if you include only SLH-DSA in it, it would MANDATE SLH-DSA and SLH-DSA only for all roots and intermediates of all chains. I don't think this is practical.

Reviewer 2: What information would be carried in a signature_algorithms_cert when the CA issues a PQ cert and a ECC cert?

What is meant with the last sentence about "optimize bandwidth" in such a case. The two chains would be different and the case where the second chain only contains the end entity cert is when there is no subordinate CA certificate and the trust anchor (root CA cert) is not transmitted in the TLS Certificate message (which should not be done anyway).

Author: But yes, if you have `signature_algorithms_cert = {slhdsa}`, then you are saying that only SLH-DSA CAs are allowed.

If you want to allow all algs as CAs, then you would need to list them all in signature_algorithms_cert. That is how I would expect that to work. Is that not how it works today?

~~~~~~~~~~
{: title="TLS 1.3 Certificate message"}

This document re-uses the `Certificate` structure as-is and extends the semantics of `certificate_list` to support two logically distinct certificate chains, encoded sequentially and separated by a delimiter.

### Delimiter

The delimiter is a zero-length certificate entry encoded as 3 bytes of 0x00. TLS 1.3 prohibits empty certificate entries, so this delimiter is unambiguous. The delimiter MUST NOT be sent to peers that did not indicate support for dual certificates by including the `dual_signature_algorithms` extension.

This specification expands CertificateEntry structure from {{Section 4.4.2 of TLS}} in the following way:

Certificate parsing logic MUST reject messages that contain more than one zero-length delimiter, or that place the delimiter as the first or last entry in the certificate list. Certificate parsing logic is:

~~~~~~~~~~ ascii-art
struct {
    select (is_delimiter) {
        case Delimiter: uint24 delimiter = 0;
        case Non_Delimiter:
          select (certificate_type) {
              // handling of certificate types defined in

>               // [RFC8447] as usual.

Reviewer: Any particular reason you want to remove it? I think complete structure makes it easier for implementers.

Reviewer: Ok, how about:

~~~~~~~~~~ ascii-art
struct {
    select (is_delimiter) {
        case Delimiter: uint24 delimiter = 0;
        case Non_Delimiter:
          opaque cert_specific_data<1..2^24-1>;
          Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
    };
} CertificateEntry;
~~~~~~~~~~
{: title="Updated CertificateEntry structure definition"}

          };
          Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
    };
} CertificateEntry;
~~~~~~~~~~
{: title="Updated CertificateEntry structure definition"}

All entries before the delimiter are treated as the first certificate chain and MUST use algorithms from `first_signature_algorithms` list of `dual_signature_algorithms` extension, all entries after the delimiter are treated as the second certificate chain and MUST use algorithms from `second_signature_algorithms` list of `dual_signature_algorithms` extension. As specified in {{Section 4.4.2 of TLS}}, end-entity certificate MUST be the first in both chains.

> A peer receiving this structure MUST validate each chain independently according to its corresponding signature algorithm. The first certificate chain MUST contain an end-entity certificate whose public key is compatible with one of the algorithms listed in the `first_signature_algorithms` section of `dual_signature_algorithms` extension. The second certificate chain MUST contain an end-entity certificate whose public key is compatible with one of the algorithms listed in the `second_signature_algorithms` section of `dual_signature_algorithms` extension. Both certificate chains MUST contain non-end-entity certificates whose public keys are compatible with algorithms listed in the `signature_algorithm_cert` extension if present; this behaviour is unmodified from {{!RFC8446}}. Any errors encountered during certificate or certificate chain validation MUST be treated with the same bahaviour as if that error had occurred in a single-algorithm context as specified in {{!RFC8446}}. Implementers MAY wish to consider performing this verification in a timing-invariant way so as not to leak which certificate failed, for example if it failed for policy reasons rather than cryptographic reasons, however since this information is not hidden in a single-certificate TLS handshake, implementers MAY decide that this is not important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A peer receiving this structure MUST validate each chain independently according to its corresponding signature algorithm. Any errors encountered during certificate or certificate chain validation MUST be treated with the same bahavior as if that error had occurred in a single-algorithm context as specified in {{Section 4.4.2.4 of TLS}}. Implementers MAY wish to consider performing this verification in a timing-invariant way so as not to leak which certificate failed, for example if it failed for policy reasons rather than cryptographic reasons, however since this information is not hidden in a single-certificate TLS handshake, implementers MAY decide that this is not important.
```

I removed sentences that seem to contradict previous paragraph. I believe we want first chain to contain only certificates using algorithms from the first list and the second chain to contain only certificates using algorithms from the second list - regardless if they are end-entity certificate or not. Don't you agree?

Author: I fully disagree.

`signature_algorithms` is about negotiating the public key of the end-entity cert. `signature_algorithms_cert` is about negotiating the algorithm of the intermediate and root CA. Mixed-algorithm chains are perfectly fine in TLS, and I expect that they will become more common in a PQ world (ex.: SLH-DSA roots with ML-DSA EEs).

In fact, I think it's totally reasonable for the two certs of a dual-cert to be issued by the same SLH-DSA CA.

Author: Wait, so you're trying to use this draft to on-purpose contradict 8446 to make it match what's in the wild? That seems extremely bad.

Author: > Is there a downside to include both SLH-DSA and ML-DSA in a list of dual_signature_algorithms to cover your use case?

But that doesn't cover the case I described. That would allow SLH-DSA to be used in a dual, that does not allow it to be used as a single in the cert chain.

This encoding applies equally to the `CompressedCertificate` message and to `Certificate` message of Exported Authenticators.

## CertificateVerify Message {#certificate-verify}

> TLS 1.3 defines the `CertificateVerify` message as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CertificateVerify` message is defined in {{Section 4.4.3 of TLS}} as follows:
```

~~~
struct {
     SignatureScheme algorithm;
     opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
} CertificateVerify;
~~~
{: title="TLS 1.3 CertificateVerify message"}

> This document defines `DualCertificateVerify` which extends `CertificateVerify` in the obvious way to carry two independent signatures.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about renaming the structure. Some may assume that we are introducing a new message type.

I think we need to have a single struct with select along the following lines:
~~~
struct {
    select (Certificate.contains_delimiter):
        true:
             SignatureScheme algorithm;
             opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
        false:
             SignatureScheme first_algorithm;
             opaque first_signature<0..2^16-1>;
             SignatureScheme second_algorithm;
             opaque second_signature<0..2^16-1>;
} CertificateVerify;
~~~

Or we need to be very explicit that this is the replacement contents of CertificateVerify when Delimiter is present in the `Certificate` message.

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether we have potentially reached the limits of the TLS language syntax here. I wonder whether we should better express the semantics in text by something something like: 

"In case of the original CertificateVerifiy message ... use this structure. For carrying two signatures use the following structure ..."

~~~~~~~~~~ ascii-art
struct {
    SignatureScheme first_algorithm;
    opaque first_signature<0..2^16-1>;
    SignatureScheme second_algorithm;
    opaque second_signature<0..2^16-1>;
} DualCertificateVerify;
~~~~~~~~~~
{: title="DualCertificateVerify message"}

It is an error for any fields to be empty. In particular, the `DualCertificateVerify` structure MUST NOT be used to carry only a single signature. Such cases MUST abort with an `illegal_parameter` alert.

> The `DualCertificateVerify` message MAY be used in place of `CertificateVerify` anywhere that it is allowed.

Reviewer 2: This is a difficult case and will require feedback from the TLS group. Both, changing the structure of the CertificateVerify as well as renaming it, is quite a change. Implementation-wise is not a big deal but conceptually I think it is.

~~~~~~~~~~

> {: title="TLS 1.3 Certificate message"}

Author: I think we can let this shake out during WG review.

This dual-signature structure applies equally to `CertificateVerify` messages carried in Exported Authenticators with second signature using "Secondary Exported Authenticator" as the context string.

_EDITORIAL NOTE: As this document progresses through WG review, it would be good to analyze whether this is actually adding security value, or if it can be removed._

> 

Reviewer: Please remove this and file an issue to track this.

A single composite certificate chain and signature such as defined by {{?TLS-COMPOSITE-MLDSA=I-D.tls-reddy-composite-mldsa}} MAY be an acceptable alternative during post-quantum transition period as long as corresponding signature scheme is listed in `signature_algorithms` extension.

Additional policy examples are given in {{sec-policy-examples}}.

# Performance Considerations

The use of dual certificates increases the size of the certificate and certificate verify messages, which can result in larger TLS handshake messages. These larger payloads may cause packet fragmentation, retransmissions, and handshake delays, especially in constrained or lossy network environments.

To mitigate these impacts, deployments can apply certificate chain optimization techniques, such as those described in {{Section 6.1 of ?PQ-RECOMMEND=I-D.reddy-uta-pqc-app}}, to minimize transmission overhead and improve handshake robustness.

> One implication of the design of this dual-algorithm negotiation mechanism is that the peer MUST honour any combination of algorithms from the `first_signature_algorithms` and `second_signature_algorithms` lists that the other peer chooses, even if it chooses the two largest or the two slowest algorithms. In constrained environments, it is important for TLS implementations to be configured with this in mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One implication of the design of this dual-algorithm negotiation mechanism is that the peer is expected to honor any combination of algorithms from the `first_signature_algorithms` and `second_signature_algorithms` lists that the other peer chooses, even if it chooses the two largest or the two slowest algorithms. In constrained environments, it is important for TLS implementations to be configured with this in mind.
```

I don't think MUST is appropriate here. Local policy may still decline a combination it does not like.

Author: I disagree.

I think it would be bad design for a client to advertise certain algorithms, the server picks from that list, and then the client kills the connection because it doesn't like what the server picked. I think that should not be possible. The easiest way to make that not possible is to say that if you advertised suppor for it, then you MUST support it.

# Client-Driven Authentication Requirements {#sec-policy-examples}

_MikeO: I don't see anything normative in this section that is not already covered normatively above. I would move it to an appendix and rename it "Policy Examples". I would rename "Type X" to "Example X"._

> 

Reviewer: Sounds good. Please open an issue.

Author: Done in e1b828e

A single composite certificate chain and signature such as defined by {{?TLS-COMPOSITE-MLDSA=I-D.tls-reddy-composite-mldsa}} MAY be an acceptable alternative during post-quantum transition period as long as corresponding signature scheme is listed in `signature_algorithms` extension.

Additional policy examples are given in {{sec-policy-examples}}.

# Performance Considerations

> The use of dual certificates increases the size of the certificate and certificate verify messages, which can result in larger TLS handshake messages. These larger payloads may cause packet fragmentation, retransmissions, and handshake delays, especially in constrained or lossy network environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The use of dual certificates increases the size of the Certificate and CertificateVerify messages, which can result in larger TLS handshake messages. These larger payloads may cause packet fragmentation, retransmissions, and handshake delays, especially in constrained or lossy network environments.
```

Author: So I left it this way because we actually mean `DualCertificateVerify`, but then the sentence is weird because you can't "increase the size" of something that's new. I know this sentence is a bit awkward, but I don't really have suggestions.

## Side-Channel Resistance

Some implementations MAY wish to treat a dual signature as an atomic signing oracle and thus hide side-channels that would allow an attacker to distinguish the first algorithm from the second algorithm, for example if the first signature fails, still perform the second signature before returning an alert. However, in most cases this does not have practical value, for example if all algorithms offered as dual are also offered as single.

Distinct context strings are REQUIRED for the two signatures to prevent cross-protocol misuse or collision attacks.

> _MikeO: I think this section needs to be expanded and beefed up with literature references, because I'm not convinced that these are real and justified attacks. If you can get a cross-protocol or collision attack between ML-DSA and ECDSA, I'll be impressed. What does that even mean?_

Reviewer: Please file an issue
